# Guidelines for Data Management

### Data Storage
* All raw and cleaned data should be stored on the Healthy Headwaters Lab shared drive in the appropriate subfolder within the Data folder. 
* Data files that you are working on may be stored on your personal computer until they are cleaned up but **make sure** you back up all of your data regularly onto the shared drive. 
* Upload your raw data as soon as it is collected to avoid a backlog of uncategorized data!

#### Raw Data
Raw data (i.e., initial results coming in either from the field, the lab, or the machine) should be saved within the GLI - Healthy Headwaters Lab/General/Data/Raw data folder and the specific folder for the equipment used to collect it. For example, data collected from the Fluorometer would be stored in GLI - Healthy Headwaters Lab/GeneralData/Raw Data/OANL/Fluorometer. For data that are not generated by OANL equipment (e.g., benthic invertebrate samples, field sheets), raw data should be saved in a project-specific folder within GLI - Healthy Headwaters Lab/General/Data/Raw Data. If your project does not yet have a folder, please add one (folder name should be a short description and your last name).   

When working with the raw data, *copy it into a new file for your project*. This will allow raw data to be available to multiple team members. **Don't modify the raw data directly**  

#### Naming conventions
Data should be named using both a short file name and the date, such as: FILENAME_YYYMMDD. Generally the FILENAME will be concise and descriptive and refer to the project under which it falls (e.g., SedimentP_Essex_20190715). When there will be multiple files with similar data across different dates, use the same file name for easier organization.

### Meta-data
Metadata for datasets should be stored in the GLI - Healthy Headwaters Lab - General/Data/Data metadata.xlsx file. This spreadsheet has multiple tabs:
* **Partner Data** - This tab details datasets that are either publically available or have been provided to HHL by our partners. Please ensure you have permission from the partners when using the partner-shared datasets
* **Raw data** - This tab details raw data that has been uploaded by HHL team members. Each file that is added should be listed as a row in this tab, with information on the date collected/run, the type of data, and the project(s) it is associate with.
* **HHL datasets** - This tab lists datasets that are coming out of HHL projects. These are datasets that are clean and in a shareable format and would likely be uploaded at or near the end of a project.
* **Sample tracking** - lists the physical locations of samples collected by the HHL, even if analyses have not been run (or if analyses have been run but some sample material remains)
  
**When creating field sites, please enter them into the GLI - Healthy Headwaters Lab - General/Operations/Lab Manual and Protocols/Field Protocols/Site naming & details/Site_information.xlsx file to ensure all site names are unique.**

### Data Management Timelines
**Raw data** should be uploaded *as soon as it is available*. **Working data** should be backed up periodically throughout the year to avoid any computer mishaps, and *at minimum once per year*. Final **HHL datasets** should be uploaded at the end of your project as part of your exit procedures, or earlier if appropriate. 

